It makes sense for the librarian to recommend books, right? Because that's what
a librarian is supposed to be, someone who knows lots and lots about books,
right? Well, in a way that could be true about me; I'm a massive lover of
literature in general, and if you asked me to recommend something from general
literature I would have no trouble whatsoever (for example, War and Peace was
the highlight of my summer, and you should all read it. Sometimes you just need
something Russian...). However, I'm quite new to the world of science fiction and
fantasy. My roots are in manga and anime, and even though the transition from
these genres to sci fi is quite smooth, it was also very recent for me. As a
result I'm perhaps ill equipped to recommend books from the sci fi library. I
could mostly point you towards the classics, or the really big names that most
people know about already. I do think I might have some unique contributions
though, so I will be having a (somewhat) regular column in Wyrmtongue listing my
recommendations. 

...Or, that's what I thought before I started writing this article properly. What
I feel about the following book series simply can't be contained within a list
of ``this was good and you should read it''. I. Must. Rant.

Now, I might get a lot of bad karma for recommending this, but... you guys just
HAVE to read Twilight!!! I went through the first three volumes in a state of
extreme amazement, eyes wide open and staring, hands gripping the covers, my
face a constant mask of utter disbelief. I just could. not. believe. how BAD it
was. At times I was laughing out loud just because of the sheer absurdity of it
all. I won't go into a long explanation of plot and characters, because anyone
who doesn't know the Twilight story by now must be living under a rock.
(Basically the books are trying to tell us the importance of having a boyfriend,
through the inspiring and intellectually challenging medium of teenage angst.
And vampires.)

Each book took me no more than two or three days to finish despite their size,
and my explanation (or excuse) for this is that the books were filled with so
much nothing. It was like reading brick- sized blocks of air. I just kept
reading and reading in search of something that was something instead of all
this nothing, and all of a sudden the book was over and neither the characters
nor I had gained anything. This is some of the worst literature I've read in my
life, for a number of reasons. First of all, language. Good language can make
almost any story a masterpiece, and it's what contributes the most to the
lasting impression you get from a book. The most common reaction I had to the
language in Twilight as I was reading was ``wait... what??''. The adjectives do not
make sense! The descriptive parts are boring at their best, and really really
confusing at their worst. The sentences are just awkward most of the times. I
wish I could give you a good example of what you might be getting in to, but you
would get more out of visiting the site reasoningwithvampires.tumblr.com, which
is also a decent alternative if you can't be bothered to read the books but
still want to smugly condemn them in public. 

What I do want to share with you is my opinion of character and story
development. Enter the potentially most hated characters in recent history.
Bella, Edward, Jacob. None of you make any goddamn sense. You know how a well
written character is usually measured by looking at what he/she/it learns and
experience that makes him/her/it realise something about him/her/itself, and see
if something useful is learnt from the past events that will change how
he/she/it behaves in the future? You know, character development. On that scale,
Twilight gets a zero. The characters learn nothing and never change. The one
character that I had hopes for was Jacob, who in the second book starts out as a
decent guy. He's kind, supportive and almost feels like a real person. Never
have I ever been so angry to see someone transform into a supernatural creature.
The nice, caring, borderline realistic boy gets transformed into the brooding,
emotionally unstable supernatural being that has become the norm in this series,
opening up a whole new level of teenage angst. This is the only change any of
the characters ever experience. Ever. It also makes possible the most
anticlimactic scene in the history of literature.

This infamous scene involves Bella's inability to let any of her admirers go and
Jacob's increasing frustration about this. This is the most realistic emotional
reaction to anything that goes on in these books, and when it comes to a boiling
point in this one scene in the third book I actually started to have some hopes
for this series. Basically Jacob threatens to kill himself unless Bella succumbs
to some innocent making out (consider how lame this sounds, then consider that
this is the peak experience in this series. Yeah.). It's all very dramatic and
very heart pinching and all that, and I started to get genuinely interested.
Because there was no way the author would get out of this without some drama,
some skilful problem solving and some kind of story arch. There was no way out
of it; this would require some actual character development! Some irreversible
change! Finally something might start that feels at least slightly relevant! I
excitedly started on the next chapter. The next scene, THEY DECIDE NEVER TO TALK
ABOUT IT AGAIN. And they never do. 

I realise that this was mostly just a massive angry rant about Twilight
(admittedly, not exactly the most original of topics) but I do genuinely
recommend the Twilight ``saga''. There's just so much in there to make fun of, and
it's a great topic of conversation and condemnation. And I haven't even
mentioned the fourth book, which I haven't read yet. Basically it seems to take
all the outrageousness of the first three books and press into one volume. This
series is simply a must for any true cynic – something that should apply to all
members of this library.

And I promise to write about a proper book next time!

Amanda Sjödahl Head librarian
